# MolDyn-2023-MitoProject
This repository covers all files that were made and used for computationally modeling mitochondrial membranes with native lipids/proteins. This project at Molecular Dynamics, University of Groningen, was adequate for fulfillment of the bachelor Biology and Medical Laboratory Research at Hanze University of Applied Sciences.

**Below, key aspects of the project proposal can be found.**

_Mitochondrial structural features and membrane composition_ - 
Mitochondria have five distinct structural features: the outer membrane, the inner membrane with cristae (folds), the intermembrane space between the two lipid bilayers, and the mitochondrial matrix. Each compartment has unique characteristics and it is especially remarkable that this organelle has two lipid bilayers; this project will therefore focus on mitochondrial membranes. The outer membrane is smooth and contains many proteins that make the membrane porous, whereas the inner membrane is folded and crowded with much more proteins than the outer membrane has. The outer membrane mainly consists of 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (POPC), 1-steaoryl-2-arachidonoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (SAPE), cholesterol (CHOL) in a ratio of CHOL:0.5 SAPE:4 POPC:5.5, and the respective inner lipid monolayer additionally consists of 1-steaoryl-2-arachidonoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoinositol (SAPI), in composition CHOL:0.5 SAPE:2 POPC:5.5 SAPI:2. Both the outer and inner monolayer of the inner mitochondrial membrane consists of POPC, 1-palmytoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (POPE) and cardiolipin (CRDL), where the outer monolayer has a composition of POPC:5 POPE:4 CRDL:1 and the inner monolayer additionally contains SAPI and has a somewhat more loosened structure of POPC:3 POPE:3 CRDL:3 SAPI:1.

_Protein-protein, lipid-lipid and protein-lipid interactions in mitochondrial membranes_ - 
Not only membrane lipids but also mitochondrial membrane proteins are asymmetrically distributed, and both lipids and proteins influence general membrane features: the site of membrane protein assembly is not only dependent on initial lipid locations, but simultaneously influences lipid sorting and may even contribute to lipid adjustments in length and molecular curvature. Accumulation of lipids such as cardiolipins that are more flexible in structure can also contribute to curvature of the membrane as a whole; also, curvature of the membrane around the protein may sometimes be the only way in which lipids cover all hydrophobic protein domains. On top of this, protein assembly and accumulation in biological membranes has functional properties for which examples apply especially well to the inner mitochondrial membrane. Folding of the mitochondrial inner membrane provides compartmentalization and isolation from the rest of the mitochondrion via protein-lipid and protein-protein interactions. Approximately 45% of the membrane’s hydrophobic volume is occupied by membrane proteins and mainly the cristae are rich in protein supercomplexes that are often associated with the respiratory chain. These complexes thus assemble by means of protein-protein/protein-lipid/lipid-lipid interactions and consequently, if the lipidome of the inner mitochondrial membrane is disordered, such complexes dissociate.

_What led to this study_ -
One can imagine that the mitochondrion thus needs mechanisms that account for the high protein crowding in its inner membrane; if the membrane is not stabilized, this can lead to curvature stress, conformational or topological changes to the respective protein, and membrane distortion. This collectively highlights the importance of understanding these interactions. We know that membrane protein assembly, lipid sorting, and several types of involved interactions account for mitochondrial membrane features and stability, but in detail, many biomolecular mechanisms remain elusive. Such topics have to some extent already been experimentally researched, but these studies face limitations in terms of resolution, biological representativeness, thermodynamics, and more. Therein, computer simulations can offer an advantage by providing more information about the unique environment of a protein, and all interactions that therein occur. It must be remarked that a whole organelle with both lipids and proteins has not been simulated yet (only a mitochondrion with lipids in its membranes). During the whole project, crosstalk between the experimental work field should be improved regarding perevious research to properly validate and interpret our results. 

_Aim of this study_ -
This study therefore aims to apply molecular dynamics to simulate the membranes of a mitochondrion with membrane proteins in its native lipid bilayer, accounting for membrane curvature, using the following MD tools:

 - Gromacs;
 - Insane;
 - Martini;
 - Martinize;
 - Gromit/Martinate;
 - DAFT;
 - Backward.

Such a project is heavily multifaceted and faces multiple side-projects. For example, mitochondrial protein databases may not contain all proteins, and the structure of some proteins may be incomplete or missing; this project will account for this and will therefore yield a highly complete documentation of mitochondrial proteins in terms of structure, stoichiometry, protein-lipid interactions, protein-protein interactions, lipid sorting, et cetera; even before building a system as eventually aiming for. Besides working towards a system configuration that can be used to simulate a whole mitochondrion with native lipids and proteins, this project will likely gain insights in other aspects too. For example, the setup of initial configurations of (individual) proteins in a complex lipid environment that resembles the mitochondrial inner or outer membrane may provide new information about protein behavior and its interactions. On top of that, accounting for membrane curvature in the mitochondrial systems would, to the best of our knowledge, often be a novel study, as well as setting up a complete mitochondrion would be. Finally, by documenting the taken steps such as stated above, a workflow can be developed that may not only discuss MD simulations, but also quality assurance and analysis thereof. Such a workflow not only limits itself to mitochondria: in fact, mitochondria are among the most complex organelles that exist. When succesfully having run through the workflow for building a mitochondrion, building other organelle systems may thus more easily follow.
